This repository contains supplemental materials to the ESA 2024 poster:
## Effect of record-breaking rainfall on the spread of Oriental Bittersweet in the Bellamy River watershed
by Jessica S Graustein, Yanzhe (Jerry) Chen, Minghao (Max) Ye \
[_Portsmouth Christian Academy_](https://pcaschool.org/)

### Abstract
_Celastrus orbiculatus Thun._ (Oriental Bittersweet) is an invasive liana that girdles and overtops trees, making them susceptible to windthrow, which in turn disrupts the soil and promotes erosion. We used a dendroecological approach in an observational study of the effect precipitation had on the establishment of _C. orbiculatus_ along brooks that feed the Bellamy River, a tidal tributary of the Great Bay in Dover NH. We hypothesized that 2023’s record-breaking rainfall contributed to the spread of _C. orbiculatus_ on the campus of Portsmouth Christian Academy. We collected data from three transects across land that drained into three different brooks: one that runs along a parking lot, one that runs through a hilly lawn, and one that runs through a wooded buffer. We counted all _C. orbiculatus_ lianas found in the 1m<sup>2</sup> quadrats of each transect, cut 20 cm sections from them at ground-level, and then calculated year of establishment from the number of rings in each sample. The first individual to invade the transects became established in 2013, when rainfall totaled 78 cm during the March-October growing season. A four-year gap with no recruitment followed (72-81 cm rain per growing season). From 2018-2022, recruitment across all transects was limited (1-4 lianas per year with 52-93 cm rain per growing season). The record-breaking 102 cm of rain during the growing season of 2023 corresponds with a spike of 14 new lianas, 11 of them concentrated in one quadrat of the parking lot transect. Even after this spike, however, 12 of the 18 quadrats had still not been invaded. Our observations indicate that it may be beneficial for land managers in northern New England to check for emerging patches of _C. orbiculatus_ after growing seasons with over 100 cm of rain so they can apply control measures before the new lianas damage trees.

### Table of Contents
**Assets Folder** \
Digital Poster: [RecordRainfallPoster-GrausteinChenYe.pdf](https://github.com/jessigbiology/RainXBittRecruitment/blob/b6e872e007dd34c2566d11b0484fc8f331c19ec0/assets/RecordRainfallPoster-GrausteinChenYe.pdf)
